Africa is booming the capita income
since the year 2000 have doubled and
this boom is impacting on everyone life
expectancy is increased by one year
every three years for the last decade
that means if a African child is born
today rather than three days ago they
will get an extra day of life at the end
of their lifespan it's that quick an HIV
infection rates are down 27% 600,000
less people a year are getting HIV in
sub-saharan Africa the battle against
malaria is being won the deaths from
malaria down 27 percent according to the
latest World Bank data and malaria nets
actually are playing a role in that this
shouldn't surprise us because actually
everybody grows if you go back to
Imperial Rome in the year 1 AD that was
admittedly about 1800 years where there
wasn't an awful lot of growth but then
the people that the Romans would have
called Scottish barbarians my ancestors
were actually part of the Industrial
Revolution in the 19th century growth
began to accelerate and you saw that get
quicker and quicker and it's been
impacting everyone it doesn't matter if
this is the jungles of Singapore or the
tundra of northern Finland everybody
gets involved it's just a matter of when
the inevitable happens among the reasons
I think it's happening right now is the
quality of the leadership across Africa
I think most of us would agree that in
the 1990s the greatest politician in the
world was African but I'm meeting
brilliant people across the continent
the entire time and they're doing the
reforms which have transformed the
economic situation for their countries
and the West is engaging with that the
West has given debt forgiveness programs
which have halved sub-saharan debt from
about 70 percent of GDP down to about 40
at the same time our debt levels gone up
to 120 and we're all feeling slightly
miserable as a result politics gets we
when debts high when public sector debt
is low government's don't have to choose
between investing in education and
health and paying interest on that debt
yu-er it's not just the public sector
which is looking so good the private
sector as well again in the West we have
private sector debt of 200% of GDP in
Spain the UK and the US it's an awful
lot of debt Africa many African
countries are sitting at 10 to 30
percent of GDP if there's any continent
that can do what China's done
China's had about 130 percent of GDP on
that chart if anyone can do what China's
done in the next 30 years the last 30
it'll be Africa in the next 30 so
they've got great government finances
great private sector debt does anyone
recognize this in fact they do the
foreign direct investment has poured
into Africa in the last 15 years back in
the 70s
no one touched the continent with a
bargepole and this investment is
actually Western led we hear a lot about
China and they do lend a lot of money
but 60% of the FDI in the last couple of
years has come from Europe America
Australia Canada ten percents come from
India and they're investing in energy
Africa produces 10 million barrels a day
of oil now it's the same as Saudi Arabia
or Russia and they're investing in
telecoms shopping malls and this very
encouraging story I think is partly
demographic LED and it's not just about
African demographics I'm showing you the
number of 15 to 24 year olds in various
parts of the world and the blue line is
the one I want you to focus on for a
second ten years ago say your Foxconn
setting up an iPhone Factory by chance
you might choose China which is the bulk
of that East Asian blue line but there's
200 million young people and every year
until 2010 that's getting bigger which
means you can have new guys knocking on
the door saying give us a job and I
don't need a big pay rise just please
give me a job now that's completely
changed now
this decade we're going to see a 20 to
30 percent fall in the number of 15 to
24 year olds in China so where do you
set up your new factory you look at
South Asia and people are they're
looking at Pakistan and Bangladesh and
they were also looking at Africa and
they're looking at Africa because that
yellow line is showing you that the
number of young Africans is going to
continue to get bigger decade after
decade after decade out to 2050 as a
problem with lots of young people coming
into the any market particularly young
men a bit dangerous sometimes I think
one of the crucial factors is how
educated is that demographic if you look
at the red line here what you're going
to see is that in 1975 just 9 percent of
kids in secondary school education in
sub-saharan Africa would you set up a
factory in sub-sahara in the mid 1970s
nobody else did they chose instead
turkey and Mexico to set up the textiles
factories because their education levels
were 25 to 30 percent today
sub-sahara is at the levels that turkey
in Mexico were out in 1975 they will get
the textiles jobs that will take people
out of rural poverty and put them onto
the road to industrialization and wealth
so what's Africa looking like today this
is how I look at Africa it's a bit odd
because I'm an economist each little box
is about a million dollars and you see
that I pay an awful lot of attention to
Nigeria sitting there in the middle
South Africa is playing a role but when
I'm thinking about the future I'm
actually most interested in Central
Western and Southern Africa if I look at
Africa by population East Africa stands
out as so much potential and I'm showing
you something else with these maps I'm
showing you democracy versus autocracy
fragile democracies is the beige color
strong democracies of the orange color
and what you'll see here is that most
Africans are now living in democracies
why does that matter because what people
want is what politicians try then always
succeed but they try and deliver and
what you've got is a reinforcing
positive circle going on in Ghana in the
elections in December 2012 the battle
between the two candidates was over
education one guy offered free secondary
school education to all not just 30% the
other guy I had to say I'm going to
build 50 new schools he won by a margin
so democracy is is encouraging
governments to invest in education
education is helping growth and
investment and that's giving budget
revenues which is giving government's
more money which is helping growth
through education it's a positive
virtuous circle but I get asked this
question and this particular question
makes me quite sad it's but what about
corruption
how can you invest in Africa when
there's corruption and what makes me sad
about it is that this graph here is
showing you that the biggest correlation
with corruption is wealth when you're
poor corruption is not your biggest
priority and the countries on the
right-hand side you'll see the per
capita GDP basically every country with
a per capita GDP of say less than five
thousand dollars has got a corruption
score of roughly what's that about three
three out of ten that's not good every
poor country is corrupt every rich
country is relatively uncouple t and
corruption to wealth and less corruption
you see the middle class grow and the
way to do that is to invest not to say
I'm not investing in that continent
because there's too much corruption now
I don't to be an apologist for
corruption I've been arrested because I
refuse to pay a bribe and not in Africa
actually but what I'm saying here is
that we can make a difference and we can
do that by investing now I'm gonna show
you let you into a little not so secret
economists aren't great for
costing because the question really is
what happens next and and if you go back
to the year 2000 what you'll find is the
economists had a very famous cover the
hopeless continent and what they'd done
is they looked at growth in Africa over
the previous 10 years 2 percent they
said what's going to happen in the next
10 years they assumed 2% and that made
it a pretty hopeless story because
population growth is 2 and a half people
got poorer in Africa in the 1990s now
2012 The Economist has a new cover and
what does that new cover show that new
cover shows well Africa rising because
the growth over the last 10 years has
been about five and a half percent now
I'd like to see if if you can all now
become economists because if growth for
the last 10 years has been five and a
half percent what do you think the IMF
is forecasting for the next five years
of growth in in Africa very good I think
you're secretly saying to your head
probably five and a half percent you're
all economists and I think like most
economists wrong no offense
what I like to do is try and find the
countries that are doing exactly what
Africa's already done and it means that
jumped from 1800 years of nothing to
woof suddenly shooting through-the-roof
India is one of those examples this is
Indian growth from 1960 to 2010 kicked
all the scale on the bottom for a second
actually for the first 20 years 60s and
70s
India didn't really grow it grew at 2%
when population growth was about two and
a half that's familiar that's exactly
what happened in sub-sahara in the 80s
and the 90s and then something happened
in 1980 boom India began to explode it
wasn't a Hindu rate of growth
democracies can't grow actually India
occurred and if I lay sub-saharan growth
on top of the Indian growth story it's
remarkably similar 20 years of not much
growth and a trend line which is
actually telling you the sub-saharan
African growth is slightly better than
India and if I then lay
developing Asia on top of this I'm
saying India's 20 years ahead of Africa
I'm think developing Asia is 10 years
ahead of India I can draw out some
forecasts for the next 30 to 40 years
which I think the better than the ones
were you looking backwards and that
tells me this that Africa is going to go
from a two trillion dollar economy today
to a 29 trillion dollar economy by 2050
now that's bigger than Europe and
America put together in today's money
life expectancy is going to go up by 13
years the population is going to double
for one billion to two billion so
household incomes are going to go up
Sevenfold in the next 35 years and when
I present this in Africa Nairobi Lagos a
crowd I get one question Charlie why are
you so pessimistic you know what
actually I think they've got a point am
I really saying that they can be nothing
learned yes from the positives in Asia
in India but also the negatives perhaps
Africa can avoid some of the mistakes
that have been made
surely the technologies that we're
talking about here this last week surely
some of these can perhaps help Africa
grow even faster and I think here we can
play a role because technology does let
you help you can go and download some of
the great African literature from the
internet now no not right now just 30
seconds you can go and buy some of the
great tunes my iPods full of them by
African products go on holiday and see
for yourself the change that's happening
invest perhaps hire people give them the
skills that they can take back to Africa
and their companies will grow an awful
lot faster than most of ours here in the
West and then you and I can help make
sure that for Africa the 21st century is
there century thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]